Baseline system

This is the base system which we will be modifying in each experiment in order to give this research paper a common base to build upon and to ensure consistency in the result analysis.

Firstly, let’s take a look at our Observation space and Action space for both our agents(Jeff and Tim).

Observation Space
Our observation space consists of 17 parameters that encode both agent-centric and environment-level information to support decision-making in a continuous multi-agent setting. These include normalized velocities of both the agent and opponent in a rotated (agent-relative) coordinate frame, capturing forward and lateral motion dynamics. The observation also includes the relative position of the opponent with respect to the agent, as well as the normalized distance to the goal line, which provides progress information for scoring. Agent and opponent orientations are encoded using sine and cosine representations to avoid discontinuities in angular values. In addition, the observation includes the normalized distance between both agents, along with relative angular information indicating the direction from the agent to both the opponent and the goal. The agent’s angular velocity is also included to provide information about rotational dynamics and motion stability. Finally, absolute positional features such as the normalized x-coordinates of both the agent and the opponent are included to provide spatial context within the court layout. Together, these 17 features form a compact but expressive state representation that enables learning of both local interactions and global strategic positioning.
Code: 
self.observation_space = spaces.Box(low=-1.0, high=1.0, shape=(17,), dtype=np.float32)


Action Space
Our action space consists of two continuous parameters, each controlling a distinct aspect of agent motion in the environment. The first parameter governs rotational control by directly specifying the agent’s angular velocity. This value lies in the range [-1, 1], where -1 corresponds to maximum leftward rotation, +1 corresponds to maximum rightward rotation, and intermediate values represent proportional angular velocities. This signal is linearly scaled to the environment’s maximum angular velocity, allowing smooth and continuous steering dynamics.
The second parameter controls forward propulsion (throttle). Although the raw action is sampled from the range [-1, 1], it is clipped to [0, 1], ensuring that only forward motion is permitted. The resulting value is used as a scalar multiplier for the agent’s forward force in the direction of its current heading, which is then applied within the environment’s physics simulation. This design simplifies the learning problem by removing backward motion, encouraging forward-committed movement strategies and improving training stability in the adversarial multi-agent setting.




Environment Design

How our environment works - Our environment blends realistic physics components such as drag, force, momentum, and angular velocity, which all come together to make the transfer of the agents from sim to real(when the time comes) much simpler.

			Reward Structure
The reward structure in this environment is a hybrid system combining dense shaping rewards, terminal outcome rewards, and regularization penalties to guide both offensive and defensive learning. For the offensive agent (Jeff), the reward is primarily driven by continuous progress toward the goal, where the agent receives positive feedback when it reduces its distance to the goal line, encouraging forward motion and scoring-oriented behavior. In addition, a proximity-based reward increases as Jeff gets closer to the scoring region, reinforcing the importance of staying in high-value spatial areas near the goal. However, this is balanced by penalties that discourage inefficient or unsafe behavior, including a penalty when the defender is within a threatening radius, which encourages maintaining spacing and avoiding interception risk. To ensure stable control, the system also penalizes rapid changes in steering direction, reducing jitter and promoting smoother motion, while additional boundary penalties discourage the agent from drifting toward or exploiting the edges of the court. For the defensive agent (Tim), the reward structure is more complex and includes both reactive and predictive components. Tim is rewarded for reducing the distance to Jeff over time, encouraging persistent pursuit, but this is further enhanced by a predictive interception mechanism where Tim is rewarded for minimizing the distance to Jeff’s future predicted position rather than his current location, effectively encouraging anticipatory defense. This is reinforced with a velocity alignment term that rewards movement in the direction of the predicted interception target, promoting efficient and purposeful trajectories. A small intrinsic motion reward discourages stagnation, while a positional advantage reward encourages Tim to position himself between Jeff and the goal, reinforcing correct defensive placement. Similar to the offensive agent, Tim is also penalized for excessive jitter in steering and sudden acceleration changes, ensuring smooth and physically realistic movement, along with boundary penalties to prevent unrealistic positioning near court edges. Finally, both agents are subject to a strong terminal reward structure where successful goals, interceptions, and timeouts produce large outcome-based rewards or penalties, ensuring that long-term episode outcomes dominate learning while the shaping rewards guide intermediate behavior.
